- Feature Name: `bdfl`
- Start Date: 2018-04-01
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Rust Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This RFC ends the quaint process of RFCs and begins the appointment process,
by referanda, of a benevolent dictator for life.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Everyone can agree that our decision making process,
of RFCs and building consensus within teams and the community at large,
while being a nice idea and all,
is ineffective, slow, and leads to bad decisions.

Instead, we clearly need a strong leader who can make the
`Result<RightThing™, E>`s happen and unify all `E`s with `!`.
We can therefore be assured that the leader will produce infallible results!

This leader, who knows best,
will also ensure that Rust becomes coherent and consistent instead of a mess.
To ensure community cohesion, the BDFL will also be appointed by referanda,
but to cut down on red tape, the leader will be anointed for life.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

## New concepts

- **BDFL**, is a benevolent dictator for life.
- **Consensus**, is a cute idea that does not work in practice.
- **Popularity**, is all that matters.

## An RFC to end all RFCs

The core team will collect nominations for a position as BDFL in the Rust community.
The nomination period will commence one week from the acceptance of this RFC
and last one month, at which point all nominees who have gathered more than
10'000 nominations will continue on to the next round.
This will be done to ensure that a strong leader is appointed.

At exactly this day, one year hence, an election will be held.

Then, whoever wins this process will be anointed dictator for life and will
have final say in all matters, including, but not limited to:

- Language design
- The standard library
- Community events
- Tooling
- Blessed crates

The BDFL will go under the title Ferris the First.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

Other than what has been mentioned in the [guide-level-explanation],
there are some minor insignificant details:

- On the passing of the BDFL, the title shall go to their lastborn.
- The [Friends of Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/en-US/friends.html), in their
infinite wisdom, will be given votes in total equaling 1/3 of the total vote.

*[Jedi mind trick]* You did not read this section.

> **I did not read this section.**

*\- You*

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

[RFC 1068]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/1068

Some naysayers, might think that dictatorship is wrong or that there is a risk
of corruption, ...but what do they know.

# Rationale and alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

Consensus and transparency was previously an alternative,
but it has clearly been ineffective and led to inconsistent results,
wherefore this practice needs to be ended.

Chiefly among the Bad Decisions™ was to remove `Infallible` from the standard
library. This is plainly absurd, we can't have a fallible standard library.

By electing an infallible leader, Rust will achieve greatness
and extremely desirable results. I mean, what could go wrong?

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

[Here's a list of other projects with BDFLs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benevolent_dictator_for_life)

Our BDFL will clearly be the best tho.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

- The title of the BDFL is up for bikeshedding.