- Feature Name: N/A
- Start Date: 2022-01-19
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#3373](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3373)
- RFC PR #2: [rust-lang/rfcs#3581](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3581)
- Tracking Issue: [rust-lang/rust#120363](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/120363)

## Summary
[summary]: #summary

Add a warn-by-default lint for items inside functions or expressions that
implement methods or traits that are visible outside the function or
expression. Consider ramping that lint to deny-by-default for Rust 2024, and
evaluating a hard error for 2027.

## Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Currently, tools cross-referencing uses and definitions (such as IDEs) must
either search inside all function bodies and other expression-containing items
to find potential definitions corresponding to uses within another function, or
not cross-reference those definitions at all.

Humans cross-referencing such uses and definitions may find themselves
similarly baffled by code such as the following:
```rust
trait Trait<T> {
    fn method(&self) {}
}

struct Foo;

fn _foo() {
    struct Bar;
    impl Trait<Bar> for Foo {}
}

fn main() {
    Foo.method();
}
```

This change helps humans limit the scope of their search and avoid looking for
definitions inside other functions or items, without missing any relevant
definitions. If in the future we manage to forbid it entirely within a
subsequent Rust edtion, tools will be able to rely on this as well.

## Explanation
[explanation]: #explanation

An "expression-containing item" is defined as any
[expression](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/expressions.html) where an
[item](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/items.html) may be defined. For
example:
- Functions
- Closures
- The values assigned to `static` items or non-anonymous `const` items.
- The discriminant values assigned to `enum` variants

As an exception, anonymous `const` items are excluded from this
definition for the purposes of this RFC (see [unresolved-questions]),
as they're currently commonly used to define items within macros.

Rust will emit a warn-by-default lint when encountering an `impl` nested inside
an expression-containing item (through any level of nesting), unless any of the
following are true:
- For `impl T` or `impl TraitPath for T`, the definition of type `T` is also
  nested inside the same expression-containing item.
- For `impl T<X, Y, ..>` or `impl TraitPath for T<X, Y, ..>`, the definition of
  at least one of `T`, `X`, `Y`, .. is also nested inside the same expression-
  containing item.
- For `impl Trait for TypePath` or `impl Trait<X, Y, ..> for TypePath`, the
  definition of `Trait` is also nested inside the same expression-containing
  item.
- For `impl Trait<X, Y, ..> for TypePath`, the definition of at least one of
  `X`, `Y`, .. is also nested inside the same expression-containing item, *and*
  the full path `Trait<X, Y, ..>` may not be inferred from outside the
  expression-containing item, and further that such inferences on `Trait` would
  not be permitted even in the absense of all impls nested in expression-
  containing items.

For the purposes of the above rules, fundamental types such as `&X` and `&mut X`
are considered parameterized types (`T<X>`).

Rust will emit a warn-by-default lint when encountering an exported macro (e.g.
using `#[macro_export]`) nested inside an expression-containing item (through
any level of nesting).

In a future edition, we may consider making this lint deny-by-default, or
eventually making it a hard error. We'll evaluate the impact on the ecosystem
and existing use cases before doing so.

The lint is considered to attach to the `impl` token of an `impl` block, or the
`macro_rules!` token of a macro definition.

## Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Some existing code makes use of this pattern, and would need to migrate to a
different pattern. In particular, this pattern may occur in macro-generated
code, or in code generated by tools like rustdoc. Making this change would
require such code and tools to restructure to meet this requirement.

## Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

Other aspects of Rust's design attempt to enable local reasoning and avoid
global reasoning, including non-inference of function signatures, and not
having the function body affect non-opaque properties of `impl Trait` uses in
the signature without reflecting those properties in the signature.

## Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

Should we flag these definitions in anonymous `const` items as well? This is
used in some macro expansions for
[compatibility reasons](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3373#issuecomment-1885307786).

Is the last rule regarding parameterized trait `impl` items viable to implement?

## Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

If in the future Rust provides a "standalone `derive`" mechanism (e.g. `derive
Trait for Type` as a standalone definition separate from `Type`), the `impl`
produced by that mechanism would be subject to the same requirements.
