- Feature Name: `path_bases`
- Start Date: 2023-11-13
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#3529](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3529)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/cargo#14355](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/14355)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Introduce a table of path "bases" in Cargo configuration files that can be used
to prefix the path of `path` dependencies and `patch` entries.

This feature will not support declaring path bases in manifest files to avoid
additional design complexity, though this may be added in the future.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

As a project grows in size, it becomes necessary to split it into smaller
sub-projects, architected into layers with well-defined boundaries.

One way to enforce these boundaries is to use different Git repos (aka
"multi-repo"). Cargo has good support for multi-repo projects using either `git`
dependencies, or developers can use private registries if they want to
explicitly publish code or need to preprocess their sub-projects (e.g.,
generating code) before they can be consumed.

If all of the code is kept in a single Git repo (aka "mono-repo"), then these
boundaries must be enforced a different way: either leveraging tooling during
the build to check layering, or requiring that sub-projects explicitly publish
and consume from some intermediate directory. Cargo has poor support for
mono-repos: the only viable mechanism is `path` dependencies, but these require
relative paths (which makes refactoring and moving sub-projects very difficult)
and don't work at all if the mono-repo requires publishing and consuming from an
intermediate directory (as this may very per host, or per target being built).

This RFC proposes a mechanism to specify path bases in `config.toml` files which
can be used to prepend `path` dependencies. This allows mono-repos to specify
dependencies relative to their root directory, which allows the consuming
project to be moved freely (no relative paths to update) and a simple
find-and-replace to handle a producing project being moved. Additionally, a
host-specific or target-specific intermediate directory may be specified as a
`base`, allowing code to be consumed from there using `path` dependencies.

### Example

If we had a sub-project that depends on three others:

* `foo` which is in a different layer of the mono-repo.
* `bar_with_generated` that must be consumed from an intermediate directory
because it contains target-specific generated code.
* `baz` which is in the current layer.

We may have a `Cargo.toml` snippet that looks like this:

```toml
[dependencies]
foo = { path = "../../../other_layer/foo" }
bar_with_generated = { path = "../../../../intermediates/x86_64/Debug/third_layer/bar_with_generated" }
baz = { path = "../baz" }
```

This has many issues:

* Moving the current sub-project may require changing all of these relative
paths.
* `bar_with_generated` will only work if we're building x86_64 Debug.
* `bar_with_generated` assumes that the `intermediates` directory is a sibling
to our source directory, and not somewhere else completely (e.g., a different
drive for performance reasons).
* Moving `foo` or `baz` requires searching the code for each possible relative
path (e.g., `../../../other_layer/foo` and `../foo`) and may be error prone if
there is some other sub-project in directory with the same name.

Instead, if we could specify these common paths as path bases in a `config.toml`
(which may be generated by an external build system which in turn invokes Cargo):

```toml
[path-bases]
sources = "/home/user/dev/src"
intermediates = "/home/user/dev/intermediates/x86_64/Debug"
```

Then the `Cargo.toml` can use those path bases and avoid relative paths:

```toml
[dependencies]
foo = { path = "other_layer/foo", base = "sources" }
bar_with_generated = { path = "third_layer/bar_with_generated", base = "intermediates" }
baz = { path = "this_layer/baz", base = "sources" }
```

Which resolves the issues we previously had:

* The current project can be moved without modifying the `Cargo.toml` at all.
* `bar_with_generated` works for all targets (assuming the `config.toml` is

generated).
* The `intermediates` directory can be placed anywhere.
* Moving `foo` or `baz` only requires searching for the canonical form relative
to the path base.

## Other uses

The ability to use path bases for `path` dependencies is convenient for
developers who are using a large number of `path` dependencies within the same
root directory. Instead of repeating the same path fragment many times in their
`Cargo.toml`, they can instead specify it once in a `config.toml` as a path
base, then use that path base in each of their `path` dependencies.

Cargo will also provide built-in base paths, for example `workspace` to point to
the root directory of the workspace. This allows workspace members to reference
each other without first needing to `../` their way back to the workspace root.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

If you often use multiple path dependencies that have a common parent directory,
or if you want to avoid putting long paths in your `Cargo.toml`, you can
define path _base directories_ in your
[configuration](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/config.html).
Your path dependencies can then be specified relative to those base
directories.

For example, say you have a number of projects checked out in
`/home/user/dev/rust/libraries/`. Rather than use that path in your
`Cargo.toml` files, you can define it as a "base" path in
`~/.cargo/config.toml`:

```toml
[path-bases]
dev = "/home/user/dev/rust/libraries/"
```

Now, you can specify a path dependency on a library `foo` in that
directory in your `Cargo.toml` using

```toml
[dependencies]
foo = { path = "foo", base = "dev" }
```

Like with other path dependencies, keep in mind that both the base _and_
the path must exist on any other host where you want to use the same
`Cargo.toml` to build your project.

You can also use `base` along with `path` when specifying a `[patch]`.
Specifying a `path` and `base` on a `[patch]` is equivalent to specifying just a
`path` containing the full path including the prepended base.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## Specifying Dependencies

### Path Bases

A `path` dependency may optionally specify a base by setting the `base` key to
the name of a path base from the `[path-bases]` table in either the
[configuration](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/config.html#path-bases)
or one of the [built-in path bases](#built-in-path-bases). The value of that
path base is prepended to the `path` value (along with a path separator if
necessary) to produce the actual location where Cargo will look for the
dependency.

For example, if the `Cargo.toml` contains:

```toml
[dependencies]
foo = { path = "foo", base = "dev" }
```

Given a `[path-bases]` table in the configuration that contains:

```toml
[path-bases]
dev = "/home/user/dev/rust/libraries/"
```

This will produce a `path` dependency `foo` located at
`/home/user/dev/rust/libraries/foo`.

Path bases can be either absolute or relative. Relative path bases are relative
to the parent directory of the configuration file that declared that path base.

The name of a path base must use only [alphanumeric](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.char.html#method.is_alphanumeric)
characters or `-` or `_`, must start with an [alphabetic](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.char.html#method.is_alphabetic)
character, and must not be empty.

If the name of path base used in a dependency is neither in the configuration
nor one of the built-in path base, then Cargo will raise an error.

#### Built-in path base

Cargo provides implicit path bases that can be used without the need to specify
them in a `[path-bases]` table.

* `workspace` - If a project is [a workspace or workspace member](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/workspaces.html)
then this path base is defined as the parent directory of the root `Cargo.toml`
of the workspace.

If a built-in path base name is also declared in the configuration, then Cargo
will prefer the value in the configuration. The allows Cargo to add new built-in
path bases without compatibility issues (as existing uses will shadow the
built-in name).

## Configuration

`[path-bases]`

* Type: string
* Default: see below
* Environment: `CARGO_PATH_BASES_<name>`

The `[path-bases]` table defines a set of path prefixes that can be used to
prepend the locations of `path` dependencies. See the
[specifying dependencies](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/specifying-dependencies.html#path-bases)
documentation for more information.

## cargo add

### Synopsis

`cargo add` *[options]* `--path` *path* [`--base` *base*]

### Options

#### Source options

`--base` *base*

The [path base](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/specifying-dependencies.html#path-bases)
to use when adding from a local crate.

## Workspaces

Path bases can be used in a workspace's `[dependencies]` table.

If a member is inheriting a dependency (i.e., using `workspace = true`) then the
`base` key cannot also be specified for that dependency in the member manifest.
That is, the member will use the `path` dependency as specified in the workspace
manifest and has no ability to override the base path being used (if any).

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

1. There is now an additional way to specify a dependency in
   `Cargo.toml` that may not be accessible when others try to build the
   same project. Specifically, it may now be that the other host has a
   `path` dependency available at the same relative path to `Cargo.toml`
   as the author of the `Cargo.toml` entry, but does not have the path base
   defined (or has it defined as some other value).

   At the same time, this might make path dependencies _more_ re-usable
   across hosts, since developers can dictate only which _bases_ need to
   exist, rather than which _paths_ need to exist. This would allow
   different developers to host their path dependencies in different
   locations from the original author.
2. Developers still need to know the path _within_ each path base. We
   could instead define path "aliases", though at that point the whole
   thing looks more like a special kind of "local path registry".
3. This introduces yet another mechanism for grouping local
   dependencies. We already have [local registries, directory
   registries](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/source-replacement.html),
   and the [`[paths]`
   override](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/overriding-dependencies.html#paths-overrides).
   However, those are all intended for immutable local copies of
   dependencies where versioning is enforced, rather than as mutable
   path dependencies.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

This design was primarily chosen for its simplicity — it adds very
little to what we have today both in terms of API surface and mechanism.
But, other approaches exist.

Developers could have their `path` dependencies point to symlinks in the
current directory, which other developers would then be told to set up
to point to the appropriate place on their system. This approach has two
main drawbacks: they are harder to use on Windows as they [require
special privileges](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/security/threat-protection/security-policy-settings/create-symbolic-links),
and they pollute the user's project directory.

For the build-system case, the build system could place vendored
dependencies directly into the source directory at well-known locations,
though this would mean that if the source of those dependencies were to
change, the user would have to re-run the build system (rather than just
run `cargo`) to refresh the vendored dependency. And this approach too
would end up polluting the user's source directory.

An earlier iteration of the design avoided adding a new field to
dependencies, and instead inlined the base name into the path using
`path = "base::relative/path"`. This has the advantage of not
introducing another special keyword in `Cargo.toml`, but comes at the
cost of making `::` illegal in paths, which was deemed too great.

Alternatively, we could add support for extrapolating environment
variables (or arbitrary configuration values?) in `Cargo.toml` values.
That way, the path could be given as `path =
"${base.name}/relative/path"`. While that works, it's not trivially
backwards compatible, may be confusing when users try to extrapolate
random other configuration variables in their paths, and _seems_ like a
possible Pandora's box of corner-cases.

The [`[paths]`
feature](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/overriding-dependencies.html#paths-overrides)
could be updated to lift its current limitations around adding
dependencies and requiring that the dependencies be available on
crates.io. This would allow users to avoid `path` dependencies in more
cases, but makes the replacement more implicit than explicit. That
change is also more likely to break existing users, and to involve
significant refactoring of the existing mechanism.

We could add another type of local registry that is explicitly declared
in `Cargo.toml`, and from which local dependencies could then be drawn.
Something like:

```toml
[registry.local]
path = "/path/to/path/registry"
```

This would make specifying the dependencies somewhat nicer (`version =
"1", registry = "local"`), and would ensure a standard layout for the
locations of the local dependencies. However, using local dependencies
in this manner would require more set-up to arrange for the right
registry layout, and we would be introducing what is effectively a
mutable registry, which Cargo has avoided thus far.

Even with such an approach, there are benefits to being able to not put
complex paths into `Cargo.toml` as they may differ on other build hosts.
So, a mechanism for indirecting through a path name may still be
desirable.

Ultimately, by not having a mechanism to name paths that lives outside
of `Cargo.toml`, we are forcing developers to coordinate their file
system layouts without giving them a mechanism for doing so. Or to work
around the lack of a mechanism by requiring developers to add symlinks
in strategic locations, cluttering their directories. The proposed
mechanism is simple to understand and to use, and still covers a wide
variety of use-cases.

## Support for declaring path bases in the manifest

Currently path bases only support being declared in the configuration, and not
the manifest. While it would be possible to add support for declaring path bases
in the manifest in the future (which would require specifying if the declaration
in the manifest or configuration is prefered, and how workspace versus members
declarations work), it is hard to justify the additional complexity of adding of
adding this capability to the initial implementation of the feature.

An argument could be made that specifying path bases in the manifest is a
convenience feature, allowing a common path where multiple local dependencies
exist to be specified as a path base so that the individual path dependencies
would be shorter. However, it would be just as easy to add a configuration file
to some parent directory of the dependent and this would be more useful as it is
likely that those dependencies will also be used in other local packages thus
saving the path bases table being duplicated in multiple manifests.

It could also be argued that specifying path bases in the manifest would be a
way to set "default values" for path dependencies (e.g., to a submodule) that a
developer could override in their local configuration file. While this may be
useful, this scenario is already taken care of by the `patch` feature in Cargo.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

Python searches for dependencies by walking `sys.path` in definition
order, which [is pulled
from](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html#the-module-search-path)
the current directory, `PYTHONPATH`, and a list of system-wide library
directories. All imports are thus "relative" to every directory in
`sys.path`. This makes it easy to inject local development dependencies
simply by injecting a path early in `sys.path`. The path dependency is
never made explicit anywhere in Python. We _could_ adopt a similar
approach by declaring an environment variable `CARGO_PATHS`, where every
`path` is considered relative to each path in `CARGO_PATHS` until a path
that exists is found. However, this introduces additional possibilities
for user confusion if, say, `foo` exists in multiple paths in
`CARGO_PATHS` and the first one is picked (though maybe that could be a
warning?).

NodeJS (with npm) is very similar to Python, except that dependencies
can also be
[specified](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#modules_all_together)
using relative paths like Cargo's `path` dependencies. For non-path
dependencies, it searches in [`node_modules/` in every parent
directory](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#modules_loading_from_node_modules_folders),
as well as in the [`NODE_PATH` search
path](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#modules_loading_from_the_global_folders).
There does not exist a standard mechanism to specify a path dependency
relative to a path named elsewhere. With CommonJS modules, JavaScript
developers are able to extrapolate variables directly into their
`require` arguments, and can thus implement custom schemes for getting
customizable paths.

Ruby's `Gemfile` [path
dependencies](https://bundler.io/man/gemfile.5.html#PATH) are only ever
absolute paths or paths relative to the `Gemfile`'s location, and so are
similar to Rust's current `path` dependencies.

The same is the case for Go's `go.mod` [replacement
dependencies](https://golang.org/doc/modules/managing-dependencies#tmp_10),
which only allow absolute or relative paths.

From this, it's clear that other major languages do not have a feature
quite like this. This is likely because path dependencies are assumed
to be short-lived and local, and thus having them be host-specific is
often good enough. However, as the motivation section of this RFC
outlines, there are still use-cases where a simple name-indirection
could help.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

* What exact names we should use for the table (`path-bases`) and field names
(`base`)?
* What other built-in base paths could be useful?
  * `package` or `current-dir` for the directory of the current project?
  * `home` or `user_home` for the user's home directory?
  * `sysroot` for the current rustc sysroot?

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

## Add support for declaring path bases in the manifest

As mentioned [above](#support-for-declaring-path-bases-in-the-manifest),
declaring path bases is only supported in the configuration.

Support could be added to declare path bases in the manifest, but the following
design questions need to be answered:

* Is `[path-bases]` a package or a workspace field?
* If it is a package field, would it support workspace inheritance? Or would we
introduce a new mechanism (e.g., one version of the RFC introduced a "search
order" such that Cargo would search for a path base in the package manifest,
then the workspace manifest, then the configuration and finally the built-in
list).
* Would a relative path base in the workspace manifest be relative to that
manifest, or to the package that uses it?
* If using inheritance, should path bases be implicitly or explicitly inherited?
(e.g., requiring `[base-paths] workspace = true`)

## Path bases relative to other path bases

We could allow defining a path base relative to another path base:

```toml
[path-bases]
base1 = "/dev/me"
base2 = { base = "base1", path = "some_subdir" } # /dev/me/some_subdir
```

## Path dependency with just a base

We could allow defining a path dependency with *just* `base`, making
`cratename = { base = "thebase" }` equivalent to
`cratename = { base = "thebase", path = "cratename" }`. This would simplify many
common cases, where crates appear within the base in a directory named for the
crate.

## Git dependencies

It seems reasonable to extend path bases to `git` dependencies, with something
like:

```toml
[path-bases]
gh = "https://github.com/jonhoo"
```

```toml
[dependency]
foo = { git = "foo.git", base = "gh" }
```

However, this may get complicated if someone specifies `git`, `path`, _and_
`base`.
