- Feature Name: `is`
- Start Date: 2024-02-16
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#3573](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3573)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary

Introduce an `is` operator in Rust 2024, to test if an expression matches a
pattern and bind the variables in the pattern.

# Motivation

This RFC introduces an `is` operator that tests if an expression matches a
pattern, and if so, binds the variables bound by the pattern and evaluates to
true. This operator can be used as part of any boolean expression, and combined
with boolean operators.

Previous discussions around `let`-chains have treated the `is` operator as an
alternative on the basis that they serve similar functions, rather than
proposing that they can and should coexist. This RFC proposes that we allow
`let`-chaining *and* add the `is` operator.

`if`-`let` provides a natural extension of `let` for fallible bindings, and
highlights the binding by putting it on the left, like a `let` statement.
Allowing developers to chain multiple `let` operations and other expressions in
the `if` condition provides a natural extension that simplifies what would
otherwise require complex nested conditionals. As the `let`-chains RFC notes,
this is a feature people already expect to work.

The `is` operator similarly allows developers to chain multiple match-and-bind
operations and simplify what would otherwise require complex nested
conditionals. However, the `is` operator allows writing and reading a pattern
match from left-to-right, which reads more naturally in many circumstances. For
instance, consider an expression like `x is Some(y) && y > 5`; that boolean
expression reads more naturally from left-to-right than
`let Some(y) = x && y > 5`.

This is even more true at the end of a longer expression chain, such as
`x.method()?.another_method().await? is Some(y)`. Rust method chaining and `?`
and `.await` all encourage writing code that reads in operation order from left
to right, and `is` fits naturally at the end of such a sequence.

Having an `is` operator would also help to reduce the proliferation of methods
on types such as `Option` and `Result`, by allowing prospective users of those
methods to write a condition using `is` instead. While any such condition could
equivalently be expressed using `let`-chains, the binding would then move
further away from the condition expression referencing the binding, which would
result in a less natural reading order for the expression.

Consider the following examples:

```rust
if expr_producing_option().is_some_and(|v| condition(v))

if let Some(v) = expr_producing_option() && condition(v)

if expr_producing_option() is Some(v) && condition(v)
```

The condition using `is` is a natural translation from the `is_some_and`
method, whereas the if-let construction requires reversing the binding of `v`
and the expression producing the option. This seems sufficiently cumbersome in
some cases that the absence of `is` would motivate continued use and
development of helper methods.

# Guide-level explanation

Rust provides an `is` operator, which can be used in any expression:
`EXPR is PATTERN`

This operator tests if the value of `EXPR` matches the specified `PATTERN`; see
<https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/patterns.html> for details on patterns.

If the `EXPR` matches the `PATTERN`, the `is` expression evaluates to `true`,
and additionally binds any bindings specified in `PATTERN` in the current scope
for code subsequently executed along the path where the `is` expression
is known to be `true`.

For example:

```rust
if an_option is Some(x) && x > 3 {
    println!("{x}");
}
```

The bindings in the pattern are not bound along any code path potentially
reachable where the expression did not match:

```rust
if (an_option is Some(x) && x > 3) || (more_conditions /* x is not bound here*/) {
    // x is not bound here
} else {
    // x is not bound here
}
// x is not bound here
```

The pattern may use alternation (within parentheses), but must have the same
bindings in every alternative:

```rust
if color is (RGB(r, g, b) | RGBA(r, g, b, _)) && r == b && g < 10 {
    println!("condition met")
}

// ERROR: `a` is not bound in all alternatives of the pattern
if color is (RGB(r, g, b) | RGBA(r, g, b, a)) && r == b && g < 10 {
    println!("condition met")
}
```

`is` may appear anywhere a boolean expression is accepted:

```rust
func(x is Some(y) && y > 3);
```

The `is` operator may not appear as a statement, because the bindings won't be
usable after the end of the statement, and because the boolean return value is
ignored. The compiler will issue a deny-by-default lint in that case, and
suggest using `let` if the user wants to bind a pattern for the rest of the
scope.

```rust
// deny-by-default lint: the binding `x` isn't usable after the statement, and the value of `is` is ignored.
// Suggestion: use `let` to introduce a binding in this scope: `let x = an_expression();`.
an_expression() is x;
```

# Reference-level explanation

Add a new [operator
expression](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/expressions/operator-expr.html),
`IsExpression`:

> **<sup>Syntax</sup>**\
> _IsExpression_ :\
> &nbsp;&nbsp; _Expression_ `is` _PatternNoTopAlt_

Add `is` to the [operator
precedence](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/expressions.html#expression-precedence)
table, at the same precedence level as `==`, and likewise non-associative
(requiring parentheses).

Detect `is` appearing as a top-level statement and produce an error, with a
rustfix suggestion to use `let` instead.

# Drawbacks

Introducing both the `is` operator and `let`-chains would provide two different
ways to do a pattern match as part of a condition. Having more than one way to
do something could lead people to wonder if there's a difference; we would need
to clearly communicate that they serve similar purposes.

An `is` operator will produce a name conflict with [the `is` method on
`dyn Any`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/any/trait.Any.html#method.is) in the
standard library, and with the (relatively few) methods named `is` in the
ecosystem. This will not break any existing Rust code, as the operator will
only exist in the Rust 2024 edition and newer. The Rust standard library and
any other library that wants to avoid requiring the use of `r#is` in Rust 2024
and newer could provide aliases of these methods under a new name; for
instance, the standard library could additionally provide `Any::is` under a new
name `is_type`.

# Rationale and alternatives

As noted in the [motivation](#motivation) section, adding the `is` operator
allows writing pattern matches from left-to-right, which reads more naturally
in some conditionals and fits well with method chains and similar. As noted
under [prior art](#prior-art), other languages such as C# already have this
exact operator for this exact purpose.

We could choose not to add this operator, and have *only* `let`-chains. This
would provide equivalent functionality, semantically; however, it would force
pattern-matches to be written with the pattern on the left, which won't read as
naturally in some expressions. Notably, this seems unlikely to do as effective
a job of reducing the desire for `is_variant()` methods and helpers like
`is_some_and(...)`.

We could choose to add the `is` operator and *not* add `let`-chains. However,
many people *already* expect `let`-chains to work as an obvious extrapolation
from seeing `if let`/`while let` syntax.

We could add this operator using punctuation instead (e.g. `~`). However, there
is no "natural" operator that conveys "pattern match" to people (the way that
`+` is well-known as addition). Using punctuation also seems likely to make the
language more punctuation-heavy, less obvious, and less readable.

We could add this operator using a different name. Most other names, however,
seem likely to be longer and to fit people's expectations less well, given the
widespread precedent of `is_xyz()` methods. The most obvious choice would be
something like `matches`.

We could permit top-level alternation in the pattern. However, this seems
likely to produce visual and semantic ambiguity. This is technically a one-way
door, in that `x is true|false` would parse differently depending on our
decision here; however, the use of a pattern-match for a boolean here seems
unlikely, redundant, and in poor style. In any case, the compiler could easily
detect most attempts at top-level alternation and suggest adding parentheses.

# Prior art

`let`-chains provide prior art for having this functionality in the language.

The `matches!` macro similarly provides precedent for having pattern matches in
boolean expressions. `is` would likely be a natural replacement for most uses
of `matches!`.

Many Rust enums provide `is_variant()` functions:
- `is_some()` and `is_none()` for `Option`
- `is_ok()` and `is_err()` for `Result`
- `is_eq()` and `is_lt()` and `is_gt()` for `Ordering`
- `is_ipv4()` and `is_ipv6()` for `SocketAddr`
- `is_break()` and `is_continue()` for `ControlFlow`
- `is_borrowed()` and `is_owned()` for `Cow`
- `is_pending()` and `is_ready()` for `Poll`

These functions serve as precedent for using the word `is` for this purpose.
(Note that this RFC does *not* propose to encourage people to switch away from
these methods. Among other things, users may wish to use e.g. `Option::is_some`
as a function pointer rather than having to write a closure using `is`.)

There's extensive prior art in Rust for having more than one way to accomplish
the same thing. You can write a `for` loop or you can write iterator code. You
can use combinators or write a `match` or write an `if let`. You can write
`let`-`else` or use a `match`. You can write `x > 3` or `3 < x`. You can write
`x + 3` or `3 + x`. Rust does not normatively require one alternative. We do,
in general, avoid adding constructs that are entirely redundant with each
other. However, this RFC proposes that the constructs are *not* redundant: some
code will be more readable with `let`-chains, and some code will be more
readable with `is`.

[Kotlin has a similar `is`
operator](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/typecasts.html#smart-casts) for casts to
a type, which are similarly flow-sensitive: in the code path where the `is`
test has succeeded, subsequent code can use the tested value as that type.

[C# has an `is`
operator](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-US/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/operators/is)
for type-matching and pattern matching, which supports the same style of
chaining as the proposed `is` operator for Rust. For instance, the following
are valid C# code:

```csharp
if (expr is int x && other_expr is int y)
{
    func(x - y);
}

if (bounding_box is { P1.X: 0 } or { P2.Y: 0 })
{
    check(bounding_box);
}

if (GetData() is var data
    && data.Field == value
    && data.OtherField is [2, 4, 6])
{
    show(data);
}
```

# Unresolved questions

Can we make `x is 10..=20` work without requiring the user to parenthesize the
pattern, or would that not be possible with our precedence? We could
potentially make this work over an edition boundary, but would it be worth the
churn?

Pattern types propose using `is` for a different purpose, in types rather than
in expressions: `u32 is 1..` would be a `u32` that can never be `0`, and
`Result<T, E> is Err(_)` would be a `Result<T, E>` that can never be the `Ok`
variant. Can we introduce the `is` operator in expressions without conflicting
with its potential use in pattern types? We could require the use of
parentheses in `v as u32 is 1..`, to force it to be parsed as either `(v as
u32) is 1..` or `v as (u32 is 1..)` (assuming that pattern types can be used in
`as` in the first place).

What new method name should we add to `dyn Any` as an alias for `is`? (This
does not need to be settled in this RFC, but should be handled
contemporaneously with the implementation, and tracked in the tracking issue.)

Should we add a rustc lint or clippy lint (with rustfix suggestion) to turn
`matches!` into `is`?

# Future possibilities

As with `let`-chains, we *could* potentially allow cases involving `||` to bind
the same patterns, such as `expr1 is V1(value) || expr2 is V2(value)`. This RFC
does *not* propose allowing that syntax to bind variables, to avoid confusing
code.

*If* in a future edition we decide to allow this for `let` chains, we should
similarly allow it for `is`. This RFC does not make or recommend such a future
proposal.

We could choose to offer a clippy lint or even a rustc lint, with a rustfix
suggestion, to turn `matches!` into `is`.
