- Feature Name: `use`
- Start Date: 2024-07-20
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#3680](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3680)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Provide a feature to simplify performing lightweight clones (such as of
`Arc`/`Rc`), particularly cloning them into closures or async blocks, while
still keeping such cloning visible and explicit.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

A very common source of friction in asynchronous or multithreaded Rust
programming is having to clone various `Arc<T>` reference-counted objects into
an async block or task. This is particularly common when spawning a closure as
a thread, or spawning an async block as a task. Common patterns for doing so
include:

```rust
// Use new names throughout the block
let new_x = x.clone();
let new_y = y.clone();
spawn(async move {
    func1(new_x).await;
    func2(new_y).await;
});

// Introduce a scope to perform the clones in
{
    let x = x.clone();
    let y = y.clone();
    spawn(async move {
        func1(x).await;
        func2(y).await;
    });
}

// Introduce a scope to perform the clones in, inside the call
spawn({
    let x = x.clone();
    let y = y.clone();
    async move {
        func1(x).await;
        func2(y).await;
    }
});
```

All of these patterns introduce noise every time the program wants to spawn a
thread or task, or otherwise clone an object into a closure or async block.
Feedback on Rust regularly brings up this friction, seeking a simpler solution.

In addition, Rust developers trying to avoid heavyweight clones will sometimes
suggest eschewing invocations of `obj.clone()` in favor of writing
`Arc::clone(&obj)` explicitly, to mark the call explicitly as a lightweight
clone, at the cost of syntactic salt. This RFC proposes a syntax that can
*only* make a lightweight clone, while still using a simple postfix syntax.

This RFC does *not* provide fully automatic/invisible cloning. Some users have
asked for that, wanting no visible indication at the point of the clone.
However, other users have asked that this *not* happen, and appreciate that
Rust does not have implicit clones or copy/move constructors. This RFC does not
change this, and does not provide any precedent or motivation for changing
this; any proposal to change this would need its own additional motivation and
detailed exploration of tradeoffs.

This RFC proposes solutions to *minimize* the syntactic weight of
lightweight-cloning objects, particularly cloning objects into a closure or
async block, while still keeping an indication of this operation.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

When working with objects that support lightweight cloning, such as `Rc` or
`Arc`, you can get an additional clone (a new "use") of the object by invoking
`.use`:

```rust
let obj: Arc<LargeComplexObject> = new_large_complex_object();
some_function(obj.use); // Pass a separate use of the object to `some_function`
obj.method(); // The object is still owned afterwards
```

If you want to create a closure or async block that captures new uses of such
objects, you can put the `use` keyword on the closure or async block, similar
to the `move` keyword.

```rust
let obj: Arc<LargeComplexObject> = new_large_complex_object();
let map: Arc<AnotherObject> = new_mapping();
std::thread::spawn(use || map.insert(42, func(obj)));
task::spawn(async use { op(map, obj).await });
another_func(obj, map);
```

(Note that `use` and `move` are mutually exclusive.)

`.use` supports chaining, so in particular it works when calling a method that
would otherwise consume `self`:

```rust
obj.use.consume();
obj.method();
```

Calling `x.use` requires that the type of `x` implement the `Use` trait. This
trait identifies types whose clone implementation is lightweight, such as
reference-counted types.

Various types in the standard library implement `Use`. You can implement this
trait for your own types, if they meet the requirements for being lightweight
to clone. (See the [reference-level explanation][reference-level-explanation]
for the requirements.)

```rust
impl Use for MyType {}
```

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## The `Use` trait

```rust
/// Trait for objects whose clone impl is lightweight (e.g. reference-counted)
///
/// Cloning an object implementing this trait should in general:
/// - be O(1) (constant) time regardless of the amount of data managed by the object,
/// - not require a memory allocation,
/// - not require copying more than roughly 64 bytes (a typical cache line size),
/// - not block,
/// - not have any semantic side effects (e.g. allocating a file descriptor), and
/// - not have overhead larger than a couple of atomic operations.
///
/// The `Use` trait does not provide a method; instead, it indicates that
/// `Clone::clone` is lightweight, and allows the use of the `.use` syntax.
trait Use: Clone {}
```

This trait should be implemented for anything in the standard library that
meets these criteria. Some notable types in the standard library that implement
`Use`:

- `std::sync::Arc`
- `std::sync::Weak`
- `std::rc::Rc`
- `std::rc::Weak`
- `std::sync::mpsc::Sender` and `std::sync::mpsc::SyncSender`
- Tuples of types whose components all implement `Use`
- `Option<T>` where `T: Use`
- `Result<T, E>` where `T: Use` and `E: Use`

Some notable types that implement `Clone` but should *not* implement `Use`:
arrays, `String`, `Box`, `Vec`, `HashMap`, and `BTreeMap`.

We may want to add a clippy or rustc lint (e.g. `expensive_use`) for
implementations of `Use` on an excessively large type, or a type whose `clone`
implementation seems to be obviously breaking the intended constraints on the
`Use` trait.  Such a lint would be best-effort only, and could always be marked
as `allow` by a crate, but could help to discourage such implementations.

We may want to add a clippy or rustc lint for calls to `.clone()` that could
use `.use` instead. This would help the remaining calls to `.clone()` stand out
as "expensive" clones. (Such a lint would need to take MSRV into account before
making such a suggestion; clippy already has such a mechanism and rustc may
gain one in the future.)

We may want to add a `derive(Use)`, which automatically adds `Use` bounds on
fields just as `derive(Clone)` adds `Clone` bounds on fields.

## The implementation and optimization of `.use`

An expression `x.use`, where `x` has type `T`, requires that `T: Use`. However,
`x.use` does not always invoke `Clone::clone(x)`; in some cases the compiler
can optimize away a use.

If `x` is owned and statically known to be dead, the compiler will move `x`
rather than using it. This allows functions to write `x.use` without concern
for whether it's the last usage of `x` (e.g. when passing `x.use` to a series
of functions). Much like a trailing comma, this allows every usage to be
symmetric, making it easy to compare uses or add more uses afterwards. (This
optimization also means we should generally not lint on a final use of `x.use`,
such as we currently do with the clippy lint `redundant_clone`.)

If `x` is not statically known to be dead, but *all* of the following
conditions are met, the compiler *may* elide an `x.use` and use `&x` instead:
- The compiler can statically see that `x` outlives the result of `x.use`,
- The compiler can statically see that the result of `x.use` is only accessed
  via shared reference (including methods with `&self`, dereferences via
  `Deref`, other invocations of `.use`, `use ||` closures, or `async use`
  blocks). Effectively, these conditions mean that the user could theoretically
  have refactored the code to use `&x` rather than `x.use`.

An example of these elisions:

```rust
fn f(obj: Arc<Object>) {
    g(obj.use); // `g` takes `Arc<Object>`
    h(use || obj.method()); // `Object::method` here takes `&self`
}

fn main() {
    let obj = Arc::new(Object::new());
    f(obj.use);
    f(obj.use);
    f(obj.use);
    g(obj.use);
}
```

If every invocation of `.use` or `use ||` here resulted in a call to
`Clone::clone`, this program would call `Clone::clone` 10 times (and have 11
`Arc`s to drop); however, the compiler can elide all the uses in `main` and
have `f` work with the original Arc, resulting in only 6 calls to
`Clone::clone` (and only 7 `Arc`s to drop). When an object is used repeatedly,
such as in a loop, this can result in many elisions over the course of the
program, and lower contention for atomics.

If a user has an unusual `Use` type for which they wish to avoid these
potential elisions, they can call `.clone()` directly.

At any time, we could potentially instrument the compiler to detect the number
of elided calls to `Clone::clone` in a crater run, to demonstrate the value of
this optimization.

## `use ||` closures and `async use` blocks

A closure can be written as `use |args| ...`, and an async block can be written
as `async use { ... }`, analogous to the use of `move`. (Note that `use` and
`move` are mutually exclusive.)

For any object referenced within the closure or block that a `move`
closure/block would move:
- If the object is statically dead after the closure/block, ownership gets
  moved into the closure/block.
- Otherwise, it gets `.use`ed, and the closure owns the new use of the object.
- If it isn't statically dead and doesn't implement `Use`, this produces an
  error.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

This adds language surface area.

While this still makes lightweight clones visible, it makes them *less*
visible. (See "Rationale and alternatives".)

Users may misuse this by implementing `Use` for a type that doesn't meet the
requirements. Not all of the requirements can be checked by the compiler. While
this is still *safe*, it may result in types that violate user's expectations.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

We could do nothing, and require people to continue calling `.clone()` and
introducing new bindings for closures and async blocks.

Rather than specifically supporting *lightweight* clones, we could add a syntax
for closures and async blocks to perform *any* clones (e.g. `async clone` /
`clone ||`). This would additionally allow expensive clones (such as
`String`/`Vec`). However, we've had many requests to distinguish between
expensive and lightweight clones, as well as ecosystem conventions attempting
to make such distinctions (e.g. past guidance to write `Arc::clone`/`Rc::clone`
explicitly). Having a syntax that only permits lightweight clones would allow
users to confidently use that syntax without worrying about an unexpectedly
expensive operation. We can then provide ways to perform the expensive clones
explicitly, such as the `use(x = x.clone())` syntax suggested in
[future possibilities][future-possibilities].

There are myriad names we could use for the trait, invocation syntax, and
closure / async block syntax. An ideal name for this needs to convey the
semantic of taking an additional reference to an object, without copying or
duplicating the object. Other names proposed for this mechanism include
`Claim`.

We could use a different keyword, if one fits. For instance, we could use `ref`
rather than `use`. However, this 1) might over-fit to the concept of
reference-counting specifically, rather than lightweight clones, 2) might
confuse users who expect it to produce a `&` reference, and 3) for
closures/blocks, would not generalize to explicit capture lists.

We could use a name that directly references referencing counting; for
instance, `AddRef`. However, that would be confusing for applications using
this with objects managed by something other than reference counting, such as
RCU or hazard pointers, or with (small) objects being copied.

Rather than having the method `Clone::clone`, we could have a method
`Use::do_use` and have the compiler call that. We could prevent users from
overriding that method implementation, so that it always calls `Clone::clone`;
however, having a separate `do_use` method would allow users to call
`.do_use()` (when wanting to avoid the elision of `.use`) while knowing they
can't invoke an expensive clone operation. This does not seem worth the
additional complexity, since most users should invoke `.use` directly.

Rather than using the special syntax `.use`, we could use an ordinary trait
method and invoke that method directly (e.g. `.claim()`). The syntax provided
for closures and async blocks could likewise always invoke that method. This
would not be compatible with adding smarter semantics such as eliding uses,
however. In addition, `.use` can be used in all editions of Rust (because `use`
is a reserved keyword), while a new trait with a method like `.claim()` would
require an import in existing editions and could only become part of the
prelude in a future edition.

Rather than attaching this behavior to types (e.g. `Arc` and `Rc`), we could
attach this behavior to *bindings*. For instance, we could have `let
somekeyword x = Arc::new(...);` and make it easy to clone such bindings into
closures and async blocks. However, this would add additional noise to every
such binding, when users are likely to want this behavior for *every* binding
of a given type (e.g. every `Arc`). In addition, this would require adding such
an annotation to struct fields and similar.

We could use an ordinary trait method *and* add a new set of semantics attached
to that trait method, such that the compiler is allowed to elide calls to the
trait method. This would avoid the introduction of new language syntax for
`.use`, at the cost of making something that looks like an ordinary method call
have semantics beyond those normally associated with a method call.

Rather than having a single keyword in `use ||` or `async use`, we could
require naming every individual object being used (e.g. `use(x, y) ||`).
There's precedent for this kind of explicit capture syntax in other languages
(and having it as an available *option* is in the
[future possibilities][future-possibilities] section). However, requiring a
list of every object used adds overhead to closures and async blocks throughout
a program. This RFC proposes that the single keyword `use` suffices to indicate
that lightweight cloning will take place.

Rather than having `Use` act as `Clone` and go from `&self` to `Self`, we could
translate through a trait like `ToOwned`. This would allow using `Use` when
owned values have a different type, such as `&MyType -> SmartPtr<MyType>`.
However, this would also add complexity to the common case.

We could omit the elision optimizations, and have `.use` *always* call
`Clone::clone` unconditionally. This would be slightly simpler, but would add
unnecessary overhead, and would encourage users to micro-optimize their code by
arranging to omit calls to `.use`. The elision optimizations encourage users to
always call `.use`.

In the elision optimizations, we could potentially allow the last usage of the
result of `x.use` to take ownership of it, and the compiler could insert a
`.use` at that point. However, at that point the elision would not have
resulted in any fewer calls to `.use`, so this does not seem worth the extra
complexity.

Rather than adding elision behavior for `.use`, we could add elision behavior
for specifically designated `Clone` implementations (e.g. with an attribute).
However, this would leave users unable to make an *un*-elided call to `clone`.
And if we added a mechanism to bypass this elision, the result would likely
have comparable complexity to the addition of a separate trait. Nonetheless,
there's potential for possible optimization here, and that optimization might
benefit expensive clones as well (e.g. eliding the clone of a `String` if the
`String` being cloned is statically known to be dead). We should explore
potential optimizations here.

Rather than making the elision optimizations optional and allowing for future
improvements to them, we could mandate those optimizations and specify the
exact elision rules. This would, however, constrain our ability to improve
elision in the future, as well as requiring full implementation of those
elision rules before shipping the feature. This would not be the first Rust
mechanism whose implementation is subject to change, and leaving it flexible
allows the Rust compiler to improve in the future.

We could specify that for `Copy` types, `use` always copies directly, ignoring
any `Clone` implementation. Would this have an advantage over calling `Clone`
and relying on that generally turning into a copy for `Copy` types?
(Interacting with that: in a future edition, would we want to make `.clone()`
of a `Copy` type ignore the `Clone` implementation and just copy?)

We could make `x.use` inside of a closure cause the closure to get a new use of
`x` even if it otherwise could borrow, effectively "floating" the `use` outside
of the closure. This would have different semantics, such as if the closure
mutated the object before the `use`, so deciding this is a one-way door.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

Many languages have built-in reference counting, and automatically manage
reference counts when copying or passing around objects. `.use` provides a
simple and efficient way for Rust to manage reference counts.

Some languages have copy constructors, allowing arbitrary code to run when
copying an object. Such languages can manage reference-counted smart pointers
implicitly.

Rust already has other uses of postfix syntax, notably `.await` and `?`. In
particular, `.await` provides precedent for the use of `.keyword`.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

Should we allow *any* `x.clone()` call to be elided if a type is `Use` (or `Use
+ Copy`)? If we did this, that would not give us a way to explicitly avoid
elision (unless we added a separate mechanism for that), but it would also mean
that we could avoid tracking whether a clone call came from `use` or not when
applying the elision rules, which might make the implementation simpler. (This
RFC proposes not allowing explicit `x.clone()` calls to be elided, so that
users can make explicit `x.clone()` calls to avoid elision if desired.)

Are there use cases for using something like `ToOwned` rather than always going
from `&self` to `Self`? Would any smart pointers need that?

Should `Use` be a `#[marker]` trait?

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

We could implement `Use` for small arrays (e.g. arrays smaller than 64 bytes).

We could consider using lints or similar to help avoid unexpected expensive
copies of *large* arrays or other large `Copy` types, potentially using `Use`
as a marker for what is not expensive. More generally, we could explore the
space of types with various combinations of `Use` and `Copy`, and what we want
`Copy + Use` vs `Copy + !Use` to indicate.

We could allow `.use` in struct construction without duplicating the name of a
field. For instance:

```rust
let s = SomeStruct { field, field2.use, field3.use };
/// This expands to:
let s = SomeStruct {
    field: field,
    field2: field2.use,
    field3: field3.use,
};
```

We could extend the `use` syntax on closures and async blocks to support
naming specific objects to use:

```rust
use(x) || { ... }

async use(x) { ... }
```

We could further extend the `use` syntax to support an explicit capture list of
named expressions:

```rust
use(x = x.method(), y) || { ... }

// `..` additionally captures everything that a plain `use` would
async use(x = &obj, move y, ..)
```

This could also align with other proposals for precise capture syntax (e.g.
`use(ref x)`).

This potentially makes `use` closures/blocks almost completely supersede `move`
closures; we could consider in the future whether we want to deprecate them.

We could consider providing a syntax to make invocations like `func(a.use,
b.use, c.use)` less verbose. In many cases, such a function could accept a
reference and call `.use` itself if needed, but we should evaluate whether
there are use cases not covered by that.

When adding an `impl Use for Type`, if the compiler would otherwise error due
to a missing `Clone` bound, we may want the compiler to suggest a `Use` bound
instead. (The same problem applies to other traits; for instance, an `impl Eq
for Type` may want to suggest an `Eq` bound rather than a `PartialEq` bound.)
