- Feature Name: `align_attr`
- Start Date: 2025-05-01
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#3806](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3806)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Add an `#[align(…)]` attribute to set the minimum alignment of `struct` and
`enum` fields, `static`s, functions, and local variables.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

## Bindings to C and C++

[C](https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/_Alignas) and
[C++](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/alignas) provide an `alignas`
modifier to set the alignment of specific struct fields. To represent such
structures in Rust, `bindgen` is sometimes forced to add explicit padding
fields:

```c
// C code
#include <stdint.h>
struct foo {
    uint8_t x;
    _Alignas(128) uint8_t y;
    uint8_t z;
};
```

```rust
// Rust bindings generated by `bindgen`
#[repr(C, align(128))]
pub struct foo {
    pub x: u8,
    pub __bindgen_padding_0: [u8; 127usize],
    pub y: u8,
    pub z: u8,
}
```

The `__bindgen_padding_0` field makes the generated bindings more confusing and
less ergonomic. Also, it is unsound: the padding should be using `MaybeUninit`.
And even then, there is no guarantee of ABI compatibility on all potential
targets.

## Packing a value into fewer cache lines

When working with large values (lookup tables, for example), it is often
desirable to ensure they cross over as few cache lines as possible. This
minimizes the amount of data that is brought into cache when the value is
accessed heavily. One way of doing this is to force the alignment of the value
to be at least the size of the cache line—or, for smaller values,
`next_power_of_two()` of the value size.

The simplest way of accomplishing this in Rust today is to use a wrapper struct
with a `#[repr(align(…))]` attribute:

```rust
type SomeLargeType = [[u8; 64]; 21];

#[repr(align(128))]
struct CacheAligned<T>(T);

static LOOKUP_TABLE: CacheAligned<SomeLargeType> = CacheAligned(todo!());
```

However, this approach has several downsides:

- It requires defining a separate wrapper type.
- It changes the type of the item, which may not be allowed if it is part of the
  crate's public API.
- It may add unnecessary padding to the value, wasting memory.

In some cases, it can also improve performance to align a function's code in the
same way.

## Required alignment for low-level use cases

Some low-level use-cases (for example, the [RISC-V `mtvec`
register](https://five-embeddev.com/riscv-priv-isa-manual/Priv-v1.12/machine.html#machine-trap-vector-base-address-register-mtvec))
require functions or statics to have a certain minimum alignment.

## Pointer tagging

Users may want to specify a minimum alignment for various items, in order to
leave the low bits of pointers to such items free to store additional data.

## Interoperating with systems that have types where size is not a multiple of alignment

In Rust, a type’s size is always a multiple of its alignment. However, there are
other languages that can interoperate with Rust, where this is not the case
([WGSL](https://www.w3.org/TR/WGSL/#alignment-and-size), for example). It’s
important for Rust to be able to represent such structures.

# Explanation
[explanation]: #explanation

The `align` attribute is a new
[inert](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/attributes.html#r-attributes.activity),
built-in attribute that can be applied to ADT fields, `static` items, function
items, and local variable declarations. The attribute accepts a single required
parameter, which must be a power-of-2 positive integer literal.

The maximum alignment is the same as `#[repr(align(…))]`: 2<sup>29</sup>. That
being said, some targets may not be able to support very high alignments in all
contexts. In such cases, the compiler must impose a lower limit for those
specific contexts on those specific targets. The compiler may choose to emit a
lint warning for high, non-portable alignment specifiers.

Multiple instances of the `align` attribute may be present on the same item; the
highest alignment among them will be used. The compiler may signal this case
with a warn-by-default lint.

`#[align(…)]` on a public item is part of the item’s public API, and it is a
semver-breaking change to lower it. As such, it is shown in `rustdoc`-generated
documentation. To avoid making this commitment, one can use
`#[cfg_attr(not(doc), align(…))]`.

## On ADT fields

The `align` attribute may be applied to any field of any
non-`#[repr(transparent)]` `struct`, `enum`, or `union`.

```rust
#[repr(C)]
struct Foo {
    #[align(8)]
    a: u32,
}

enum Bar {
    Variant(#[align(16)] u128),
}

union Baz {
    #[align(16)]
    a: u32,
}
```

The effect of the attribute is to force the address of the field to have at
least the specified alignment. If the field already has at least that alignment,
due to the required alignment of its type or to a `repr` attribute on the
containing type, the attribute has no effect.

In contrast to a `repr(align(…))` wrapper struct, an `align` annotation does
*not* necessarily add extra padding to force the field to have a size that is a
multiple of its alignment. (The size of the containing ADT must still be a
multiple of its alignment, which must in turn be no less than that of the
most-aligned field. That hasn't changed.)

Instances of the `align` attribute for fields of a `#[repr(packed(n))]` ADT may
not specify an alignment higher than `n`.

```rust
#[repr(packed(4))]
struct Sardines {
    #[align(2)] // OK
    a: u8,
    #[align(4)] // OK
    b: u16,
    #[align(8)] //~ ERROR
    c: u32,
}
```

## Interaction with `repr(C)`

`repr(C)` currently has two contradictory meanings: “a simple, linear layout
algorithm that works the same everywhere” and “an ABI matching that of the
target’s standard C compiler”. This RFC does not aim to resolve that conflict;
that is being discussed as part of [RFC
3718](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3718). Henceforth, we will use
`repr(C_for_real)` to denote “match the system C compiler”, and `repr(linear)`
to denote “simple, portable layout algorithm”; but those names are not
normative.

Of course, if a type declaration is using one of these `repr`s to make a public
API commitment as to the exact layout of a type, then any change to field
`#[align(…)]`s may be breaking.

### `repr(C_for_real)`

The layout of a `repr(C_for_real)` ADT with `align` attributes on its fields is
identical to that of the corresponding C ADT declared with `alignas`
annotations. For example, the struct below is equivalent to the C `struct foo`
from the motivation section:

```rust
#[repr(C_for_real)]
pub struct foo {
    pub x: u8,
    #[align(128)]
    pub y: u8,
    pub z: u8,
}
```

### `repr(linear)`

In a `repr(linear)` ADT, a field with an `align` attribute has its alignment, as
well as the alignment of the containing ADT, increased to at least what the
attribute specifies.

For example, the following two structs have the same layout in memory (though
not necessarily the same ABI):

```rust
#[repr(linear)]
pub struct foo {
    pub x: u8,
    #[align(128)]
    pub y: u8,
    pub z: u8,
}
```

```rust
#[repr(linear, align(128))]
pub struct foo2 {
    pub x: u8,
    pub _padding: [MaybeUninit<u8>; 127usize],
    pub y: u8,
    pub z: u8,
}
```

## On `static` items

Any `static` item (including `static`s inside `extern` blocks) may have an
`align` attribute applied:

```rust
#[align(32)]
static BAZ: [u32; 12] = [0xDEADBEEF; 12];

unsafe extern "C" {
    #[align(2)]
    safe static BOZZLE: u8;
}
```

The effect of the attribute is to force the `static` to be stored with at least
the specified alignment. The attribute does not force padding bytes to be added
after the `static`. For `static`s inside `unsafe extern` blocks, if the `static`
does not meet the specified alignment, the behavior is undefined. (This UB is
analogous to the UB that can result if the static item is not a valid value of
its type. The question of whether the UB can occur even if the item is unused,
has the same answer for both cases.)

The `align` attribute may also be applied to thread-local `static`s created with
the `thread_local!` macro; the attribute affects the alignment of the underlying
value, not that of the outer `std::thread::LocalKey`.

```rust
thread_local! {
    #[align(64)]
    static FOO: u8 = 42;
}

fn main() {
    FOO.with(|r| {
        let p: *const u8 = r;
        assert_eq!(p.align_offset(64), 0);
    });
}
```

### `derive` macro helper ambiguity

Some existing `derive` macros in the ecosystem currently declare `align` as a
helper attribute. To avoid breakage, we specify that `derive` helper attributes
shadow built-in attributes of the same name (so the built-in attribute does not
take effect). A warn-by-default lint is triggered when this occurs.

## On function items

On function items, `#[align(…)]` sets the alignment of the function’s entry
symbol. (It does not affect the alignment of its function item type, which
remains a 1-ZST.) This replaces `#[repr(align(…))]` on function items, from
`#![feature(fn_align)]`.

On `async fn`, the attribute controls the alignment of the code of the function
that returns the `Future`.

On function items in trait declarations, `#[align(n)]` (for some alignment `n`)
specifies the minimum alignment that all implementations of the item must have.
The generated implementation for the trait’s `dyn` type will also provide this
alignment. `impl` blocks do not have to repeat the `#[align(n)]` attribute, it
is implicit. (This enables the trait definition to raise `n` without breaking
implementations.) That being said, `impl` blocks are free to specify an
`align(…)` higher than that provided by the trait. (If they specify a *lower*
alignment, it will simply be ignored.)

The numerical value of a function pointer to a function with an `#[align(n)]`
attribute is *not* always guaranteed to be a multiple of `n` on all targets. For
example, on 32-bit ARM, the low bit of the function pointer is set for functions
using the Thumb instruction set, even though the actual code of the function is
always aligned to at least 2 bytes.

`#[align(…)]` is compatible with `#[naked]`.

`#[align(…)]` may be used on function items inside `extern` blocks. This imposes
a requirement on the symbol being linked to. The UB that can result if this
alignment is not satisfied, follows the same rules as the UB that can result
from an incorrect function signature.

If a function item in an `extern` block does *not* specify `#[align(…)]`, then a
function pointer derived from that item may have any alignment. In other words,
the following assertion may fail on any platform:

```rust
mod inner {
    #[unsafe(no_mangle)]
    #[align(64)]
    fn foo() {}
}

unsafe extern "Rust" {
    safe fn foo(); // no `#[align(…)]` specification here
}

fn main() {
    let foo_addr = foo as fn() as usize;
    assert!(foo_addr.is_multiple_of(64));
}
```

When `#[align(…)]` is combined with `#[track_caller]`, the attribute applies to
the shim that is generated for calls via function pointer, as well as to the
primary function (though the alignment of the latter is usually not observable).

WASM targets will most likely not support function alignments above 1, at least
initially.

## On local variables

The `align` attribute may also be applied to local variable declarations inside
`let` bindings. The attribute forces the local to have at least the alignment
specified:

```rust
fn main() {
    let (a, #[align(4)] b, #[align(2)] mut c) = (4u8, 2u8, 1u8);
    c *= 2;
    dbg!(a, b, c);

    if let Some(#[align(4)] x @ 1..) = Some(42u8) {
        dbg!(x);
        let p: *const u8 = x;
        assert_eq!(p.align_offset(4), 0);
    }
}
```

The `align` attribute may not be applied to function parameters. (This
prohibition is semantic, not syntactic; it is allowed under `#[cfg(false)]`).

```rust
fn foo(#[align(8)] _a: u32) {} //~ ERROR
```

The attribute may only be applied to binding patterns. It may not be applied to
any other type of pattern, including wildcard patterns:

```rust
let #[align(4)] _ = true; //~ ERROR
```

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

- This feature adds additional complexity to the language.
- The distinction between `align` and `repr(align)` may be confusing for users.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

Compared to the wrapper type approach, the `align` attribute adds additional
flexibility, because it does not force the insertion of padding. If we don't
adopt this feature, `bindgen` will continue to generate suboptimal bindings, and
users will continue to be forced to choose between suboptimal alignment and
additional padding.

## `#[align(…)]` vs `#[repr(align(…))]`

One potential alternative would be to use `#[repr(align(…))]` everywhere,
instead of introducing a new attribute.

Benefits of this alternative:

- No new attribute polluting the namespace.
- Requesting a certain alignment is spelled the same everywhere.
- `#[repr(…)]` on fields might accept additional options in the future, for
  specifying layout and padding more precisely.
- `#[repr(…)]` on function items could also accept `instruction_set(…)` as an
  argument, replacing the existing attribute of that name.

Drawbacks:

- `#[repr(align(…))]` is a longer and noisier syntax.
- `#[repr(…)]` on non-ADTs would never accept the same set of options as on
  ADTs. On field definitions, it might accept additional options to precisely
  control layout; on function items, it might accept `instruction_set(…)`, if we
  were to overturn the precedent of that being a standalone attribute. On
  statics and local variables, I doubt it would ever accept anything else at
  all.
- `#[align(…)]` *only* aligns, while `#[repr(align(…))]` also pads to a multiple
  of the alignment. Having different syntax makes that distinction more clear.

## `#[align(n)]` vs `#[align = n]`

`align = n` might be misinterpreted as requesting an alignment of *exactly* `n`,
instead of *at least* `n`.

## `#[align(…)]` on function parameters

We could choose to allow this. However, this RFC specifies that it should be
rejected, because users might incorrectly think the attribute affects ABI when
it does not. C and C++ make the same choice.

To give an example of what could go wrong, consider the following function:

```rust
fn example(#[align(1024)] very_large_value: [u64; 8192]) {
    // use `very_large_value` by reference
}
```

On typical platforms, calling this function will involve first passing
`very_large_value` on the stack or by pointer, and then copying the entire array
to a new place on the stack in order to align it. This implicit extra stack copy
is not present for `#[align(…)]`ed locals. Forbidding this, and requiring users
to make the move/copy explicit, avoids the performance footgun.

We could always lift this limitation in the future.

## Interaction with `async fn`

This RFC specifies that when applied to `async fn`, the `align` attribute should
affect the alignment of the function that returns the future. This breaks
precedent with `#[inline]`, which affects the future `poll` method.

There is good reason for this difference. In the case of `inline`, controlling
the inlineability of the function that returns the future is almost never what
you want. That function is mostly trivial, and there is little reason to deviate
from the default of inlining it in most cases. Controlling the inlineability of
the `poll` method is far more useful.

In contrast, there are several potential reasons to want to control the
alignment of an `async fn`. For example, this could be used in concert with
function pointer tagging schemes. If users apply `#[align(…)]` to an `async fn`
item believing that it will affect the alignment of the function’s pointer (as
it does with any other function item), but instead it affects that of the `poll`
method, that could even result in UB. Therefore, it makes more sense to choose
the simpler and more consistent rule of having the `#[align(…)]` attribute
affect the alignment of the function that returns the future.

The current `#![feature(fn_align)]` works this way already.

## `#[align(…)] mut local` via `mut #[align(…)] local`

This RFC proposes that the `#[align(…)]` attribute should come before the `mut`
keyword when declaring an aligned local variable.

Local variables are declared with [identifier
patterns](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/patterns.html#identifier-patterns).
The local is defined by three pieces of information:

- Its name, which is declared explicitly
- Its mutability, which is declared explicitly via the presence or absence of
  the `mut` keyword
- Its type, which is derived implicitly from the structure and type of the
  surrounding pattern.

In Rust, attributes come before the element they modify. In this case, the `mut`
keyword is an integral part of the local’s declaration; therefore, the attribute
should precede it.

## `#[align(…)]` on `_` wildcard patterns

This makes no semantic sense. Just as binding modes can only be applied to
bindings, `#[align(…)]` also can only be applied to bindings. `_` patterns are
not bindings; they are a completely separate element in the grammar.

## `#[align(…)]` function item types being 1-ZSTs

Anything else would pessimize memory usage for no reason.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

This proposal is the Rust equivalent of
[C](https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/_Alignas_) and
[C++](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/alignas) `alignas`.

There are a few significant semantic differences between those features and this
RFC:

- `#[align]` additionally allows applying the attribute to function item
  declarations, which `alignas` does not permit.
- C++, but not C, allows applying `alignas` to type declarations, like Rust’s
  `repr(align)`; this RFC does not permit that usage.
- `alignas(n)` accepts any integer constant expression or type name for `n`;
  this RFC accepts only integer literals (for now).
- `alignas(n)` allows `n` to be zero, in which case the specifier is ignored;
  this RFC does not permit that usage.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

## MSVC

Does MSVC do something weird with `alignas`? In other words, is the concern
about `repr(C)` vs `repr(linear)` purely theoretical at this point, or does it
matter in practice today?

## Interaction with `ref`/`ref mut`

What should the syntax be for applying the `align` attribute to `ref`/`ref mut`
bindings?

- Option A: the attribute goes inside the `ref`/`ref mut`.

```rust
fn foo(x: &u8) {
    let ref #[align(4)] _a = *x;
}
```

- Option B: the attribute goes outside the `ref`/`ref mut`.

```rust
fn foo(x: &u8) {
    let #[align(4)] ref _a = *x;
}
```

I believe the simplest option is to forbid this combination entirely for now,
especially as there is effectively no use-case for it.

### How I believe we should decide this eventually

In my view, the resolution of this question hinges on whether `ref`/`ref mut`
are an integral part of the local declaration. My instinct is to say that they
are not. Like the rest of the surrounding pattern, they describe how the initial
value of the local should be extracted from the scrutinee. Like this surrounding
pattern, they implicitly affect the local’s type, but don’t otherwise affect its
properties. At the point of use, you can’t distinguish a local declared with
`ref`/`ref mut` from one declared some other way.

However, one could argue that `ref`/`ref mut` are part of the same “binding
mode” syntactic element as `mut`, and that therefore, if the `align` attribute
precedes `mut`, it should precede `ref`/`ref mut` also.

I believe the the correct time to resolve this question will be when we decide
on a syntax for combining `ref`/`ref mut` with `mut`. If we choose a syntax that
make it clear that these are distinct elements:

```rust
let ref (mut x) = …;
let ref mut (mut x) = …;
```

Then, that would imply that `#[align(…)]` should be applied just before the `mut`:

```rust
let ref #[align(…)] x = …;
let ref mut #[align(…)] x = …;
let ref #[align(…)] mut x = …;
let ref mut #[align(…)] mut x = …;
```

But if we choose a syntax that treats them as components of a single “binding
mode” element:

```rust
let mut ref x = …;
let mut ref mut x = …;
```

Then, `#[align]` should always precede that element:

```rust
let #[align(…)] ref x = …;
let #[align(…)] ref mut x = …;
let #[align(…)] mut ref x = …;
let #[align(…)] mut ref mut x = …;
```

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

- The `align(…)` and `repr(align(…))` attributes currently accept only integer
  literals as parameters. In the future, they could support `const` expressions
  as well.
- We could provide additional facilities for controlling the layout of ADTs; for
  example, a way to specify exact field offsets or arbitrary padding.
- We could add type-safe APIs for over-aligned pointers; for example,
  over-aligned reference types that are subtypes of `&`/`&mut`.
  - We could also introduce a similar facility for function pointers.
- We could also add similar APIs for over-aligned function pointers.
- We could loosen the restriction that fields of a `packed(n)` struct cannot
  specify an alignment greater that `n`. (Apparently, some C compilers allow
  something similar.)
- Once
  [`#![feature(stmt_expr_attributes)]`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/15701)
  is stable, we could allow applying `#[align(…))]` to closures and async blocks
  as well.
- We could add tools to make it easier to implement function pointer tagging in
  a way that’s resilient to the ARM Thumb issue (and similar strangeness on
  hypothetical future targets).
